docs/pages/documentation/protocol/fees/fee-amm/index.mdx, before:

import LucideDroplet from '~icons/lucide/droplet'
import LucideFileText from '~icons/lucide/file-text'
import LucideCircleDollarSign from '~icons/lucide/circle-dollar-sign'
import * as Card from "../../../../../components/Card.tsx"

# Fee AMM Overview

The Fee AMM (Automated Market Maker) is a dedicated system for converting transaction fees between different stablecoins. It enables users to pay fees in any supported stablecoin while allowing validators to receive fees in their preferred token.

## How It Works

When a user pays fees in a stablecoin that differs from the validator's preference, the Fee AMM automatically converts the payment:

- **User pays**: 1.0 of their chosen stablecoin
- **Validator receives**: 0.9970 of their preferred stablecoin
- **Liquidity providers earn**: 0.003 (0.3%) as fees

This conversion happens automatically at the end of each block through batched swaps, preventing MEV attacks like sandwiching.

## Learn More

<Card.Container>
  <Card.Link
    description="Enable users to pay fees using your stablecoin"
    href="/guide/issuance/use-for-fees"
    icon={LucideCircleDollarSign}
    title="Use Your Stablecoin for Fees"
  />
  <Card.Link
    description="Complete Fee AMM protocol specification"
    href="/documentation/protocol/fees/spec-fee-amm"
    icon={LucideFileText}
    title="Fee AMM Specification"
  />
  <Card.Link
    description="Provide liquidity to enable fee token conversions"
    href="/guide/stablecoin-exchange/managing-fee-liquidity"
    icon={LucideDroplet}
    title="Managing Fee Liquidity"
  />
</Card.Container>

Commit message:

feat(docs): issuer fees when same token

docs/pages/documentation/protocol/fees/fee-amm/index.mdx, after:

import LucideDroplet from '~icons/lucide/droplet'
import LucideFileText from '~icons/lucide/file-text'
import LucideCircleDollarSign from '~icons/lucide/circle-dollar-sign'
import * as Card from "../../../../../components/Card.tsx"

# Fee AMM Overview

The Fee AMM (Automated Market Maker) is a dedicated system for converting transaction fees between different stablecoins. It enables users to pay fees in any supported stablecoin while allowing validators to receive fees in their preferred token.

## How It Works

When a user pays fees in a stablecoin that differs from the validator's preference, the Fee AMM automatically converts the payment:

- **User pays**: 1.0 of their chosen stablecoin
- **Validator receives**: 0.9970 of their preferred stablecoin
- **Liquidity providers earn**: 0.003 (0.3%) as fees

This conversion happens automatically at the end of each block through batched swaps, preventing MEV attacks like sandwiching.

When a user pays fees in the same stablecoin that the validator prefers, no AMM swap is needed. In that case, the validator still receives **99.7%** of the actual fee amount, the remaining **0.3% (30 bps)** of the fee is recorded on the `FeeManager` as **issuer fees** for that token, and an address holding the token’s `FEE_CLAIM_ROLE` can later withdraw those issuer fees via `claimTokenFees(token, recipient)`.

## Learn More

<Card.Container>
  <Card.Link
    description="Enable users to pay fees using your stablecoin"
    href="/guide/issuance/use-for-fees"
    icon={LucideCircleDollarSign}
    title="Use Your Stablecoin for Fees"
  />
  <Card.Link
    description="Complete Fee AMM protocol specification"
    href="/documentation/protocol/fees/spec-fee-amm"
    icon={LucideFileText}
    title="Fee AMM Specification"
  />
  <Card.Link
    description="Provide liquidity to enable fee token conversions"
    href="/guide/stablecoin-exchange/managing-fee-liquidity"
    icon={LucideDroplet}
    title="Managing Fee Liquidity"
  />
</Card.Container>
