docs/pages/guide/_template.mdx, before:

---
title: "!Replace Me!"
description: "Discover how to build and implement a powerful demo with step-by-step instructions. Learn essential skills and best practices for success in your project."
---




import * as Card from "../../components/Card.tsx"
import * as Demo from '../../components/guides/Demo.tsx'
import * as Step from '../../components/guides/steps'
import LucideFile from '~icons/lucide/file'
import LucideSignature from '~icons/lucide/signature'

# !Replace Me!

{/* Short description of the guide. What we are building, why we are building it, and what we will learn. */}

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Nullam elementum odio ante, sit amet tincidunt leo scelerisque vitae. Donec placerat imperdiet nibh in efficitur. Nam pharetra euismod tortor ac suscipit. Quisque nec ultrices nisl. Sed in magna sapien. Duis vel risus sed leo gravida volutpat a id libero. Pellentesque ut nunc vel turpis tristique bibendum ut eu mauris. Aliquam aliquet nunc orci, eu mattis nisi hendrerit sed. Donec volutpat dolor lectus, sit amet facilisis arcu pretium nec.

<Demo.Container name="!Replace Me!" footerVariant="source" src="tempoxyz/tempo-ts/tree/main/examples/replace-me">
  <Step.Connect stepNumber={1} />
  <Step.AddFunds stepNumber={2} />
  <Step.CreateToken stepNumber={3} last />
</Demo.Container>

## Steps

{/* Steps to follow to get the demo working and fully functioning end-to-end */}

::::steps

### Lorem

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

### Ipsum

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

::::

## Recipes

{/* Any peripheral things you can do beyond the above steps */}

### Foo

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

### Bar

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

## Best Practices

{/* Any best practices or tips to follow when using this feature */}

### Foo

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

### Bar

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

## Learning Resources

{/* Outlink to any useful links to read in /documentation/* */}

<Card.Container>
  <Card.Link
    description="Learn more about the Tempo transaction type that enables passkey signatures"
    href="/guide/use-accounts/webauthn-p256-signatures"
    icon={LucideFile}
    title="Tempo Transaction type"
  />
  <Card.Link
    description="Learn more about how (passkey) signatures are structured in the protocol"
    href="/guide/use-accounts/webauthn-p256-signatures"
    icon={LucideSignature}
    title="Signatures"
  />
</Card.Container>

Commit message:

Improve SEO metadata extraction to use first sentence only
- Update truncateDescription to prefer first complete sentence
- Fix extraction to stop at first period instead of collecting multiple sentences
- Add detection for malformed descriptions (ending mid-word)
- Improve word boundary truncation to never cut mid-word
- Update all docs pages with corrected SEO metadata

docs/pages/guide/_template.mdx, after:

---
title: "!Replace Me! • Tempo"
description: "{/ Short description of the guide."
---






import * as Card from "../../components/Card.tsx"
import * as Demo from '../../components/guides/Demo.tsx'
import * as Step from '../../components/guides/steps'
import LucideFile from '~icons/lucide/file'
import LucideSignature from '~icons/lucide/signature'

# !Replace Me!

{/* Short description of the guide. What we are building, why we are building it, and what we will learn. */}

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Nullam elementum odio ante, sit amet tincidunt leo scelerisque vitae. Donec placerat imperdiet nibh in efficitur. Nam pharetra euismod tortor ac suscipit. Quisque nec ultrices nisl. Sed in magna sapien. Duis vel risus sed leo gravida volutpat a id libero. Pellentesque ut nunc vel turpis tristique bibendum ut eu mauris. Aliquam aliquet nunc orci, eu mattis nisi hendrerit sed. Donec volutpat dolor lectus, sit amet facilisis arcu pretium nec.

<Demo.Container name="!Replace Me!" footerVariant="source" src="tempoxyz/tempo-ts/tree/main/examples/replace-me">
  <Step.Connect stepNumber={1} />
  <Step.AddFunds stepNumber={2} />
  <Step.CreateToken stepNumber={3} last />
</Demo.Container>

## Steps

{/* Steps to follow to get the demo working and fully functioning end-to-end */}

::::steps

### Lorem

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

### Ipsum

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

::::

## Recipes

{/* Any peripheral things you can do beyond the above steps */}

### Foo

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

### Bar

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

## Best Practices

{/* Any best practices or tips to follow when using this feature */}

### Foo

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

### Bar

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit.

## Learning Resources

{/* Outlink to any useful links to read in /documentation/* */}

<Card.Container>
  <Card.Link
    description="Learn more about the Tempo transaction type that enables passkey signatures"
    href="/guide/use-accounts/webauthn-p256-signatures"
    icon={LucideFile}
    title="Tempo Transaction type"
  />
  <Card.Link
    description="Learn more about how (passkey) signatures are structured in the protocol"
    href="/guide/use-accounts/webauthn-p256-signatures"
    icon={LucideSignature}
    title="Signatures"
  />
</Card.Container>
